README.md, before:

# 8051 (MCS-51) MCU in Verilog/SystemVerilog

A full MCS‑51/8051 microcontroller implementation in SystemVerilog, with CPU core, internal RAM/SFRs, timers, serial port, interrupt controller, and a Verilator testbench.

## Features
- Full MCS‑51 instruction set
- Internal data RAM (IRAM) with bit addressing
- SFRs with standard 8051 map
- Timers: T0/T1 modes 0/1/2/3
- Serial port modes 0/1/2/3
- External interrupt logic and priority
- XDATA interface and on‑chip XDATA RAM model
- Verilator testbench with ROM loader

## Directory layout
- `rtl/` RTL sources
- `tb/` Testbench and ROM images
- `sim/` (reserved) simulation assets

## Build and run (Verilator)
```sh
make sim
```

## ISA validation (differential testing)
The ISA validation harness compares RTL against a golden 8051 emulator (ucsim) and checks XDATA dumps.

```sh
python3 tests/isa/run_isa_validation.py
```

See `tests/isa/README.md` for dependencies and options.

## Top level
The top‑level MCU wrapper is `rtl/mcs51_mcu.sv` and exposes port pins plus internal ROM/XDATA memories for simulation.

## Parameters
- `IRAM_SIZE` (default 128 bytes)
- `CODE_SIZE` (default 4096 bytes)
- `XDATA_SIZE` (default 65536 bytes)
- `CODE_INIT_FILE` (hex file for ROM initialization)

## Notes
- Clock is treated as the machine‑cycle clock; instruction timing matches classic 8051 machine‑cycle counts.
- Port outputs are modeled as quasi‑bidirectional (`p*_oe` drives low when latch=0).
- Illegal/undefined opcodes are treated as `NOP` (no state change) and consume one machine cycle; `illegal_op` pulses high for one cycle in `mcs51_core`.

## Reset State
SFR reset values implemented match classic 8051 defaults:

- `ACC=00`, `B=00`, `PSW=00`, `SP=07`
- `DPL=00`, `DPH=00`, `PCON=00`
- `P0=P1=P2=P3=FF`
- `TCON=00`, `TMOD=00`, `TL0=00`, `TH0=00`, `TL1=00`, `TH1=00`
- `SCON=00`, `IE=00`, `IP=00`

Internal RAM contents are not explicitly reset.

## Testbench
`tb/tb_mcs51.sv` loads `tb/rom_basic.hex` and checks XDATA results after execution.

## Status
Core, peripherals, and testbench are implemented and pass the basic ROM test.

Commit message:

mcs51: added ISA validation harness, port RMW latch semantics, and rmw testbench

README.md, after:

# 8051 (MCS-51) MCU in Verilog/SystemVerilog

A full MCS‑51/8051 microcontroller implementation in SystemVerilog, with CPU core, internal RAM/SFRs, timers, serial port, interrupt controller, and a Verilator testbench.

## Features
- Full MCS‑51 instruction set
- Internal data RAM (IRAM) with bit addressing
- SFRs with standard 8051 map
- Timers: T0/T1 modes 0/1/2/3
- Serial port modes 0/1/2/3
- External interrupt logic and priority
- XDATA interface and on‑chip XDATA RAM model
- Verilator testbench with ROM loader

## Directory layout
- `rtl/` RTL sources
- `tb/` Testbench and ROM images
- `sim/` (reserved) simulation assets

## Build and run (Verilator)
```sh
make sim
```

RMW port‑latch check:
```sh
make rmw
```

## ISA validation (differential testing)
The ISA validation harness compares RTL against a golden 8051 emulator (ucsim) and checks XDATA dumps.

```sh
python3 tests/isa/run_isa_validation.py
```

See `tests/isa/README.md` for dependencies and options.
The default ROM generator is `tests/isa/gen_isa_full.py`, which exercises the full instruction set with flag and bit-operation coverage.

## Top level
The top‑level MCU wrapper is `rtl/mcs51_mcu.sv` and exposes port pins plus internal ROM/XDATA memories for simulation.

## Parameters
- `IRAM_SIZE` (default 128 bytes)
- `CODE_SIZE` (default 4096 bytes)
- `XDATA_SIZE` (default 65536 bytes)
- `CODE_INIT_FILE` (hex file for ROM initialization)

## Notes
- Clock is treated as the machine‑cycle clock; instruction timing matches classic 8051 machine‑cycle counts.
- Port outputs are modeled as quasi‑bidirectional (`p*_oe` drives low when latch=0).
- Illegal/undefined opcodes are treated as `NOP` (no state change) and consume one machine cycle; `illegal_op` pulses high for one cycle in `mcs51_core`.

## Reset State
SFR reset values implemented match classic 8051 defaults:

- `ACC=00`, `B=00`, `PSW=00`, `SP=07`
- `DPL=00`, `DPH=00`, `PCON=00`
- `P0=P1=P2=P3=FF`
- `TCON=00`, `TMOD=00`, `TL0=00`, `TH0=00`, `TL1=00`, `TH1=00`
- `SCON=00`, `IE=00`, `IP=00`

Internal RAM contents are not explicitly reset.

## Testbench
`tb/tb_mcs51.sv` loads `tb/rom_basic.hex` and checks XDATA results after execution.
`tb/tb_rmw.sv` validates port read‑modify‑write behavior.

## Status
Core, peripherals, and testbench are implemented and pass the basic ROM test.
